################################
# Introduction

This example illustrates the use of the PySP module of Pyomo for formulating
and solving stochastic optimization problems. It is recommended that the user
first consult the available documentation online before jumping into these
examples.

Watson, J. P., Woodruff, D. & Hart, W. (2012). PySP: modeling and solving
stochastic programs in Python. Mathematical Programming Computation 4(2).
Available at: http://mpc.zib.de/index.php/MPC/article/viewFile/85/39

Pyomo Online Documentation:
https://software.sandia.gov/downloads/pub/pyomo/PyomoOnlineDocs.html

If any concepts on stochastic programming need to be adquired or refreshed, a
good reference is:  Birge, J. R. & Louveaux, F. (2011). Introduction to
Stochastic Programming. 2nd Edition. Springer Science+Business Media.

################################
# File explanations

In order for PySP to formulate the stochastic problems some files are required.

ReferenceModel.py
	This script will be loaded as a module by the runef and runph algorithms and
	must create a Pyomo model object named "model". In the case of Switch, this
	is done importing the Utilities module and using its define_AbstractModel
	function. This requires the specification of the inputs directory, since
	command line options are not yet supported in this initial version.
	In this example, the model object is augmented with expressions that sum the
	investment and operations cost, which coincide with annual and timepoint
	costs when the fuel_markets module is not loaded. These expressions may be
	changed at will, as long as they represent total costs at each stage. Both
	runef and runph need to be given either a Var or an Expr object which sums
	up costs in each stage.

PySPInputGenerator.py
	This script builds the .dat files required by PySP to formulate the scenario
	tree and the stochastic problem. Some problem-specific parameters must be
	inputted in this script, such as the names of the stages, variables and
	scenarios. A model object will be created and instantiated with a set of
	deterministic inputs that must be provided, so that these parameters are
	saved on the RootNode.dat file. This nodal approach of specifying data
	avoids redundancies so that only parameters that are subject to uncertainty
	must be re-defined in branch and leaf nodes. The other generated file is
	ScenarioStructure.dat, which specifies the structure of the stochastic
	problem. Further documentation on the construction of these files is located
	inside this script. Note: branch and leaf node .dat files are not generated
	by this file, they must be built by the user.

rhosetter.py
	When using the progressive hedging algorithm a value for the Rho parameter
	-which affects the value of W, a pseudo-dual variable that forces the non-
	anticipativity constraints- may be set by default for all variables and 
	scenarios. But, a script may be indicated so that Rho is set per variable
	and per scenario, which (if tuned correctly for the specific problem at
	hand) may accelerate and improve convergence. Rhosetter.py uses a cost
	proportional strategy such as is described in Watson, J. P., & Woodruff, 
	D. L.  (2011). Progressive hedging innovations for a class of stochastic  
	mixed-integer resource allocation problems. Computational  Management Science.
	To achieve this, the objective function expression is parsed to obtain the
	cost coefficient of each variable and its Rho is set to that value.

rhosetter-FS-only.py
	For problems bigger than trivial examples, the rho setting process may start
	taking significant time. This can be avoided by setting custom rho values only
	for variables that are located in the root node or in the branch nodes. Leaf
	node variables are not subject to non-anticipativity constraints, so leaving
	their rho values as the default will have no effect on the algorithm or the 
	solution, except reducing rho setting time. This particular rhosetter script
	is tailored for a two stage problem. Also, the model must have an expression 
	that sums the first stage costs.  

################################
# Running the example

First, the scenario tree inputs must be built. For this, the PySPInputGenerator.py
script must be executed. The default parameters may be changed by modifying the file.

	>>>python PySPInputGenerator.py

Then, the problem may be solved either by an extensive form formulation or by the
progressive hedging algorithm.

####
#(i) EF: The runef script has multiple options. Refer to PySP documentation for more
specifications. A simple and effective way of solving a problem is to execute the
following command:

	>>>runef -m MODEL_DIRECTORY -i INSTANCE_DIRECTORY --solve --solver=SOLVER
			--output-solver-log --output-times	--traceback --solution-writer=
			pyomo.pysp.plugins.csvsolutionwriter

MODEL_DIRECTORY must be the relative path to the ReferenceModel.py file.

INPUTS_DIRECTORY must be the relative path to the .dat files generated by
PySPInputGenerator.py

SOLVER may be any solver that can handle the deterministic version of the problem.

The other options send additional information to the terminal when running the algorithm.
The solution writer is a useful plugin which writes CSV files with the stochastic
problem's solutions. In ef.csv all variable values at optimum are printed, while in
CostVarDetail.csv a summary of stage and nodal costs is written.

Note: If runef is run without options for solving, then an extensive formulation
of the problem is printed in an .lp file (can be set no .nl). This file could be later
given manually to a solver to find solutions.

#####
#(ii) PH: The runph script has multiple options. Refer to PySP documentation for more
specifications. One way of solving a problem is to execute the following command:

	>>>runph -m MODEL_DIRECTORY -i INSTANCE_DIRECTORY --solve --solver=SOLVER
		--default-rho=1000.0 --traceback --rho-cfgfile=rhosetter.py --solution-
			writer=pyomo.pysp.plugins.csvsolutionwriter --output-scenario-tree-
			solution

Note: In this command, SOLVER must be able to solve problems with non-linear terms
in the objective function. Gurobi is a solver with free licenses for students that
can handle such non linear proximity term. If only linear solvers are available,
then the cuadratic term in the PH algorithm objective function may be linearized
by runph with the option  --linearize-nonbinary-penalty-terms=PIECES, with PIECES
indicating the number of lines segments in the linearized function. To use this
option, all variables in the proximity term must have lower and upper bounds in 
the model.

Another way of solving this example is to run the command:

	>>>runph -m MODEL_DIRECTORY -i INSTANCE_DIRECTORY --solve --solver=SOLVER
		--default-rho=1000.0 --traceback --rho-cfgfile=rhosetter-FS-only.py 
		--solution-writer=pyomo.pysp.plugins.csvsolutionwriter --output-
		scenario-tree-solution

This will set Rho values only for first stage variables, thus increasing the
formulation speed. Refer to documentation inside each of the rhosetter scripts
for further details on implementation and customization.


################################
# Inputs and outputs

The example input files provided formulate a 4 node scenario tree, with a root
noot representing investment decisions and 3 leaf nodes for different fuel cost
scenarios.

LowFuelCosts: All carbon based fuels that are used by projects have their prices
halved.
MediumFuelCosts: Prices are the same as in the deterministic formulation.
HighFuelCosts: Prices are doubled from their deterministic values.

Note: MediumFuelCosts.dat is empty, since all its parameters present the same
value as the deterministic formulation, which has all of its inputs printed
in the root node .dat file.

Outputs are provided for all the described commands. These include both the
solution files written by the plugin and the standard output that PySP sends
to the terminal, for reference. These runs were perfomed on a desktop computer
and used the solver Gurobi.